README.md, before:

# nbmf‑mm — Mean‑parameterized Bernoulli NMF via Majorization–Minimization

[![CI](https://github.com/siddC/nbmf_mm/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/siddC/nbmf_mm/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/nbmf-mm.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/nbmf-mm/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE.md)

**nbmf‑mm** implements *mean‑parameterized* Bernoulli matrix factorization
\(\Theta = W H \in (0,1)^{M\times N}\) with a **Majorization–Minimization (MM)**
solver, following **Magron & Févotte (2022)**. It exposes a scikit‑learn‑style
API and two symmetric orientations:

- **`orientation="beta-dir"` (default; Original Paper Setting)**  
  **W** rows sum to 1 (simplex constraint); **H** is continuous in [0,1] with Beta prior  
  This matches Magron & Févotte (2022)

- **`orientation="dir-beta"` (Symmetric Alternative)**  
  **W** is continuous in [0,1] with Beta prior; **H** columns sum to 1 (simplex constraint)  
  Mathematically equivalent to `"beta-dir"` on `V.T`

**Projection choices** for the simplex‑constrained factor:

- **`projection_method="normalize"` (default; theory‑first)** – paper‑exact
  multiplicative step with the **/N** (or **/M**) normalizer that preserves the
  simplex in exact arithmetic and enjoys the classical MM monotonicity
  guarantee.

- **`projection_method="duchi"` (fast)** – Euclidean projection to the simplex
  (Duchi et al., 2008) performed **after** the multiplicative step. This is
  typically near‑identical to `"normalize"` numerically, but the formal MM
  monotonicity guarantee applies to `"normalize"`.

> Masked training (matrix completion) is supported: only observed entries
> contribute to the likelihood and updates. In the simplex steps the paper‑exact
> **/N** (or **/M**) normalizer is naturally replaced by **per‑row** (or
> **per‑column**) observed counts, preserving the simplex under masking.

---

## Installation

```bash
pip install nbmf-mm
```

From source:
```bash
pip install "git+https://github.com/siddC/nbmf_mm"
```

Optional extras:
```bash
# scikit-learn integration & NNDSVD-style init (if you enable it later)
pip install "nbmf-mm[sklearn]"

# docs build stack
pip install "nbmf-mm[docs]"
```

---

## Quick Start

```python
import numpy as np
from nbmf_mm import NBMF

rng = np.random.default_rng(0)
X = (rng.random((100, 500)) < 0.25).astype(float)   # binary {0,1} or probabilities in [0,1]

# Theory-first default: monotone MM with paper-exact normalizer
model = NBMF(n_components=6, orientation="beta-dir",
             alpha=1.2, beta=1.2, random_state=0).fit(X)

W = model.W_                 # shape (n_samples, n_components)
H = model.components_        # shape (n_components, n_features)
Xhat = model.inverse_transform(W)  # probabilities in (0,1)

# Transform new data using fixed components H
Y_new = (rng.random((10, 500)) < 0.25).astype(float)
W_new = model.transform(Y_new)     # shape (10, n_components)

# Masked training / hold-out validation
mask = (rng.random(X.shape) < 0.9).astype(float)  # observe 90% of entries
model = NBMF(n_components=20).fit(X, mask=mask)

print("score (−NLL per observed entry):", model.score(X, mask=mask))
print("perplexity:", model.perplexity(X, mask=mask))
```

To use the fast projection alternative:
```python
model = NBMF(n_components=6, orientation="beta-dir",
             projection_method="duchi", random_state=0).fit(X)
```

---

## Mathematical Formulations

Both orientations solve the Bernoulli likelihood: `V ~ Bernoulli(sigmoid(W @ H))`

### Orientation: `beta-dir` (Matches paper's primary formulation)
- **W**: Rows lie on probability simplex (sum to 1)
- **H**: Continuous in [0,1] with Beta(α, β) prior
- Use this to reproduce paper experiments

### Orientation: `dir-beta` (Symmetric formulation)
- **W**: Continuous in [0,1] with Beta(α, β) prior  
- **H**: Columns lie on probability simplex (sum to 1)
- Mathematically equivalent to `beta-dir` on `V.T`

## Why two orientations?

Different interpretability needs:
- **beta-dir**: W rows are mixture weights over latent factors; H captures factor-feature associations
- **dir-beta**: H columns are mixture weights over latent aspects; W captures sample-aspect propensities

Both solve the same mean-parameterized factorization with symmetric geometric constraints.

---

## API Hightlihts

NBMF(
  n_components: int,
  orientation: {"dir-beta","beta-dir"} = "beta-dir",
  alpha: float = 1.2,
  beta: float = 1.2,
  projection_method: {"normalize","duchi"} = "normalize",
  max_iter: int = 2000,
  tol: float = 1e-6,
  random_state: int | None = None,
  n_init: int = 1,
  # accepted for compatibility (currently unused in core Python impl)
  use_numexpr: bool = False,
  use_numba: bool = False,
  projection_backend: str = "auto",
)

---

## Reproducibility
- Set `random_state` (int) for reproducible initialization.
- Use `n_init > 1` to run several random restarts and keep the best NLL.

## Reproducing Magron & Févotte (2022)

To reproduce the results from the original paper, use these settings:

```python
from nbmf_mm import NBMF

# Use beta-dir to match paper exactly
model = NBMF(
    n_components=10,
    orientation="beta-dir",
    alpha=1.2,
    beta=1.2,
    max_iter=500,
    tol=1e-5
)
model.fit(X)

# W rows will sum to 1, H will be continuous
```

Run the reproduction scripts:

```bash
python examples/reproduce_magron2022.py
python examples/display_figures.py
```

---

## References
- **Simplex projection** (default):
  - J. Duchi, S. Shalev‑Shwartz, Y. Singer, T. Chandra (2008).
  Efficient Projections onto the ℓ₁‑Ball for Learning in High Dimensions. ICML 2008.
  
  - W. Wang, M. Á. Carreira‑Perpiñán (2013).
  Projection onto the probability simplex: An efficient algorithm with a simple proof, and an application. arXiv:1309.1541.
  
  - Bayesian NBMF (related, slower but fully Bayesian):
    - See the `NBMF` project by alumbreras for reference implementations of Bayesian variants.

Commit message:

feat: add legacy behavior for parity

README.md, after:

# nbmf‑mm — Mean‑parameterized Bernoulli NMF via Majorization–Minimization

[![CI](https://github.com/siddC/nbmf_mm/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/siddC/nbmf_mm/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/nbmf-mm.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/nbmf-mm/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE.md)

**nbmf‑mm** implements a Bernoulli *mean‑parameterized* non-negative (binary) matrix factorization
\(\Theta = W H \in (0,1)^{M\times N}\) with a **Majorization–Minimization (MM)**
solver, following **Magron & Févotte (2022)**. It exposes a scikit‑learn‑style
API and two symmetric orientations:

- **`orientation="beta-dir"` (default; Original Paper Setting)**  
  **W** rows sum to 1 (simplex constraint); **H** is continuous in [0,1] with Beta prior  
  This matches Magron & Févotte (2022)

- **`orientation="dir-beta"` (Symmetric Alternative)**  
  **W** is continuous in [0,1] with Beta prior; **H** columns sum to 1 (simplex constraint)  
  Mathematically equivalent to `"beta-dir"` on `V.T`

**Projection choices** for the simplex‑constrained factor:

- **`projection_method="normalize"` (default; theory‑first)** – paper‑exact
  multiplicative step with the **/N** (or **/M**) normalizer that preserves the
  simplex in exact arithmetic and enjoys the classical MM monotonicity
  guarantee.

- **`projection_method="duchi"` (fast)** – Euclidean projection to the simplex
  (Duchi et al., 2008) performed **after** the multiplicative step. This is
  typically near‑identical to `"normalize"` numerically, but the formal MM
  monotonicity guarantee applies to `"normalize"`.

> Masked training (matrix completion) is supported: only observed entries
> contribute to the likelihood and updates. In the simplex steps the paper‑exact
> **/N** (or **/M**) normalizer is naturally replaced by **per‑row** (or
> **per‑column**) observed counts, preserving the simplex under masking.

---

## Installation

```bash
pip install nbmf-mm
```

From source:
```bash
pip install "git+https://github.com/siddC/nbmf_mm"
```

Optional extras:
```bash
# scikit-learn integration & NNDSVD-style init (if you enable it later)
pip install "nbmf-mm[sklearn]"

# docs build stack
pip install "nbmf-mm[docs]"
```

---

## Quick Start

```python
import numpy as np
from nbmf_mm import NBMF

rng = np.random.default_rng(0)
X = (rng.random((100, 500)) < 0.25).astype(float)   # binary {0,1} or probabilities in [0,1]

# Theory-first default: monotone MM with paper-exact normalizer
model = NBMF(n_components=6, orientation="beta-dir",
             alpha=1.2, beta=1.2, random_state=0).fit(X)

W = model.W_                 # shape (n_samples, n_components)
H = model.components_        # shape (n_components, n_features)
Xhat = model.inverse_transform(W)  # probabilities in (0,1)

# Transform new data using fixed components H
Y_new = (rng.random((10, 500)) < 0.25).astype(float)
W_new = model.transform(Y_new)     # shape (10, n_components)

# Masked training / hold-out validation
mask = (rng.random(X.shape) < 0.9).astype(float)  # observe 90% of entries
model = NBMF(n_components=20).fit(X, mask=mask)

print("score (−NLL per observed entry):", model.score(X, mask=mask))
print("perplexity:", model.perplexity(X, mask=mask))
```

To use the fast projection alternative:
```python
model = NBMF(n_components=6, orientation="beta-dir",
             projection_method="duchi", random_state=0).fit(X)
```

---

## Mathematical Formulations

Both orientations solve the Bernoulli likelihood: `V ~ Bernoulli(sigmoid(W @ H))`

### Orientation: `beta-dir` (Matches paper's primary formulation)
- **W**: Rows lie on probability simplex (sum to 1)
- **H**: Continuous in [0,1] with Beta(α, β) prior
- Use this to reproduce paper experiments

### Orientation: `dir-beta` (Symmetric formulation)
- **W**: Continuous in [0,1] with Beta(α, β) prior  
- **H**: Columns lie on probability simplex (sum to 1)
- Mathematically equivalent to `beta-dir` on `V.T`

## Why two orientations?

Different interpretability needs:
- **beta-dir**: W rows are mixture weights over latent factors; H captures factor-feature associations
- **dir-beta**: H columns are mixture weights over latent aspects; W captures sample-aspect propensities

Both solve the same mean-parameterized factorization with symmetric geometric constraints.

### Masking semantics and legacy parity

By default, only **observed entries** contribute to both the `y` and `(1 - y)` terms of the Bernoulli likelihood, and
the simplex step divides by the **number of observed entries** (per row/column) so the simplex is preserved under masking.
This is the paper-correct masked MM.

Some research scripts for NBMF-MM pre-mask `Y` and then use `(1 - Y)` **without** reapplying the mask during the **H**
update. This effectively treats **missing entries as negatives** in the `(1 - y)` term. They also divide the **W** update
by the global number of features `n` even under masking. We expose both behaviors via two toggles:

```python
NBMFMM(
    ...,
    mask_policy="observed-only",          # default (paper-correct)
    simplex_normalizer="observed-count",   # default (paper-correct)
)

---

## API Hightlihts

NBMF(
  n_components: int,
  orientation: {"dir-beta","beta-dir"} = "beta-dir",
  alpha: float = 1.2,
  beta: float = 1.2,
  projection_method: {"normalize","duchi"} = "normalize",
  max_iter: int = 2000,
  tol: float = 1e-6,
  random_state: int | None = None,
  n_init: int = 1,
  # accepted for compatibility (currently unused in core Python impl)
  use_numexpr: bool = False,
  use_numba: bool = False,
  projection_backend: str = "auto",
)

---

## Reproducibility
- Set `random_state` (int) for reproducible initialization.
- Use `n_init > 1` to run several random restarts and keep the best NLL.

## Reproducing Magron & Févotte (2022)

To reproduce the results from the original paper, use these settings:

```python
from nbmf_mm import NBMF

# Use beta-dir to match paper exactly
model = NBMF(
    n_components=10,
    orientation="beta-dir",
    alpha=1.2,
    beta=1.2,
    max_iter=500,
    tol=1e-5
)
model.fit(X)

# W rows will sum to 1, H will be continuous
```

Run the reproduction scripts:

```bash
python examples/reproduce_magron2022.py
python examples/display_figures.py
```

---

## References
- **Simplex projection** (default):
  - J. Duchi, S. Shalev‑Shwartz, Y. Singer, T. Chandra (2008).
  Efficient Projections onto the ℓ₁‑Ball for Learning in High Dimensions. ICML 2008.
  
  - W. Wang, M. Á. Carreira‑Perpiñán (2013).
  Projection onto the probability simplex: An efficient algorithm with a simple proof, and an application. arXiv:1309.1541.
  
  - Bayesian NBMF (related, slower but fully Bayesian):
    - See the `NBMF` project by alumbreras for reference implementations of Bayesian variants.
